Notes for Interview Task with Corrymeela,

10 minute presentation

For this task we would like you to present toi the opanel that outlines yur knowledge and experience delivering community-based heritage projects that support reconciliation and peace making

**Introduction**

For the utmost clarity of this presentation I'm going to keep it structured as simply as possible. After I briefly introduce my understanding the philosophical goals of the project this presentation will come in three parts. The first will detail my practical experience working with community organisations on heritage projects; the second will discuss practically my experience of delivery on these projects; and the third section looks at strands one and two and draws out some ideas that I would pitch to illustrate for yourselves how I think and work through ideas.

Through my early career I have developed a wealth of project management experience with community-led and charitable organisations. Since 2019 I have been utilising that experience in a heritage setting here in Northern Ireland. Heritage projects in Northern Ireland innately deal with reconciliation and peace making especially in terms of space.

The legacy of the Belfast Agreement is neither simple nor static: it's a peace at once realised and yet forever in progress. That is, activities of reconciliation and peacemaking in Northern Ireland are liminal existing in two states at the same time. Heritage projects are a poetic avenue to address these issues as history is an easily understandable corollary: we can see the mark of history in our landscape even though it recedes further into our past. In Northern Ireland these projects bridge the liminal space not only of past and present but peace and conflict as well. From an experiential standpoint I bring this up to highlight that I have researched and written on the topic, published in the 2021 Glencree Journal.



In practical terms I want to discuss my experience in across three phases of this short presentation

My practical experience working with community-based organisations on hertiage projects with a focus on peace and reconciliation.

Derriaghy

I cut my teeth on the Derriaghy project. Brought in as a freelance researcher I worked with the Derriaghy Village Community Association. The DVCA had a vision for a peace space within the community and they wanted to engage with the history and heritage of their place.

I came initially to consult, and hear what the community members had to say. While I had the skills and training for the project they held the history of the place. I let their conversatio guide me to proposing areas for heritage based research: broadly speaking these included, a deeper, Irish past up to John Wesley, mills and industrialisation locally, WWI with a focus on local, Catholic combatants, and local sites of interest. 

I went away and did the archival research, PRONI, QUB, and returning with that research to present it to the community groups and further develop and hone these ideas. It was an ongoing process over a few months taking advice and presenting back to the group. We worked additionally with graphic designers to develop plans for a hoarding that would take old OS maps as a basis for telling the local story. Work was completed and a vision was established, but between then and further steps COVID-19 impacted the completition of the project.

St Matthew's

Very similar to the above but I took a role in leading the project from the front. I worked with community groups at the church and Spectrum and further beyond. Fascviliutated church based disucssions and developed history. Examined Church records and the archives. Procurement on boards and image rights and moving image rights. Developed displays and panels, a pop up museum display for the day, audio-visual 

Developed tours for children and adults focused on the concept of shared past/space and reconciliation. Children we specifiically focused on shared images, such as the shamrock, and on OS maps which show the development of Shankill area and its streetscape prior to the troubles. We asked children to consider how they moved around the streets. With adults we discussed incidents from the local past, especially the 1920s Troubles. Addittionally, showcasing evidence from census records that indiciated that local protestants considered themselves Irish in a non-problematic way.

Hnalding complex issues for differing audiences. Discussion of the troubles and peacve and change.

OH experience: importance of interview styles (structured versus unstructured)

UOSH (multiple groupds and )

Worked with variuous different groups, from communiyt-led GOAHS and SA to national bodies, MNH. 

**Dealing with sensitive topics and materials. At least one collection included material with the troubles that was sensitive in nature: ethical questions of materials. Working with volunteers.**


**My practical experience delivering differing projects **

Mixing in some of what above

I have experience working with volunteers, teams of up to 30 leading

Overseeing staff, 2 NMNI

Planning exhibitions including procurement, museum display, writing and publishing.

Presentrations on landscaoe. Local example, OHNI and Rathlin Island. 


**And finally, how I would bring these to the two strands of the project through some practical examples.**


The project coordinator and the wider partnership will support groups to develop and deliver small-  
scale heritage projects.

We will work with each group for a period of around 6 months, with 4 groups per year of the project  
(approx. 180 participants from 12 groups, producing 12 bespoke local heritage projects)

Strand 2 – Heritage Practice Programme  
The second strand of the project enables learning to be embedded across the wider heritage and  
community sectors. [I have experience with this area in teaching etc - developing training for professional and amatuer historians and archivists as part of UOSH. Amatuer aimed at interested, passionate amatuers]



Strand one

Three years, 12 groups (amrginalised) working with Causeway Coast lanbdscape case studies at 5 locations. Focus on two afreas best related to their own ara/circumstances. Selected in partnership with partitipants through preparatory workshops


Working with groups, a facilitator role - coming with expertise but there to hear out everyone's ideas and support their vision to fruition. 



Oral historyu archive & heritage harvest

Via engaging with the community, usuing basic oral history collection techniques to guide them through the process. Kitting ourselves out to record a history harvest; inviting the community into our spaces. Digitising items working with parterners to digitise these items in  complicated cases or, otherwise, setting up

pop up museum

An interpretation of our archive. 

tours

**Flânerie/Flâneur** A developed concept drawing from Bauldiare and Walter Benjamin of the individual's association with place through walking through it. Countryside equivalent Keats. Connecting with local language, local name places and local spaces [contested]. Thinking aboiut bringing in local writers to these spaces. Also psychogeography - a more modern, fun variation encouraging people to plan their spaces and their walks. Give people a map and get them to plan a tour, the highlights and sights, the narratives in their story.

This is a research and thinking step, this goes first. Encourage others to find great examples.

"Walkabout"


